# Commanding the ISS
Commanding the planet’s only space station is a huge privilege, but also an unparalleled responsibility. In this role you are not only responsible for the ship and its singular place in the world’s space program, but also the lives of the crew on board. 
In order to lead properly, you need to know what victory will look like. This is essential to then prioritizing the most important actions to take. For Chris and his crew on the ISS, they defined victory firstly as guaranteeing the survival of the crew, secondly as ensuring the survival of the ISS, and thirdly as conducting as much science as possible for the space agencies. A fourth measure of success was that when the mission was done, they all would be eager to start over, and do it again. 
As the Commander, you must work to understand the people you lead—learning their language and culture as much as possible in the time available—and tirelessly build mutual understanding and respect. You have to be able to work constructively with not just the astronauts on board, but also with the Flight Directors and their teams in the Mission Control centers around the world.
Given the level of competence of astronauts on the ISS, the normal command structure on a day-to-day basis is flat and evenly distributed. Thus the role of the Commander is generally subtle, developing the crew ahead of launch and making sure they are protected and feel fulfilled pursing their own personal objectives. But in the case of a serious problem on board, the time for subtlety is over; the command structure moves from flat to vertical. Decisions need to be swift, clearly communicated and rapidly executed by the whole crew. Responding in an emergency is the ultimate test of the Commander.
You can never prepare too early to lead. Take time to think about the things that are important and liable to happen to you, and get ready for them, always. Even bad leaders can be great examples: pay attention to them to learn how not to lead ineffectively.

# Spacewalking: Spacesuits
The vast majority of astronauts’ work is done inside the relatively safe environment of the spaceship, and they use robots like Canadarm2 to remotely do work outside in the harsh thermal vacuum. Occasionally, though, external work needs to be done that requires direct human judgment or dexterity. When the need outweighs the risk, a spacewalk is planned.
Spacewalks, or EVAs (Extra Vehicular Activities), are dangerous, physically demanding, and rare. Since Alexei Leonov did the first in 1965, just over 200 people, including the 12 moonwalkers, have ever performed an EVA—Chris was the 127th.
EVA spacesuits are designed to protect astronauts from the hostile, deadly environment of space. They are pressurized with pure oxygen to one-third of sea-level pressure, can withstand the extreme cold and heat of the vacuum, and protect astronauts from the constant bombardment of tiny, high-speed micrometeoroids that fly through the solar system at 10 kilometers per second.
The suit has a portable life-support system in its backpack. It contains your oxygen-purification system, cooling system, radio, and battery power. On your helmet, there are cameras so that Mission Control can get a visual record of work you carry out, as well as lights for working in the dark. It also has a gold visor and sunshields to protect your face and eyes from the incredibly harsh, unfiltered Sun. On the chest there is a computer display and control module to run the suit and a purge valve to dump pressure if needed. The controls and labels on the front of the suit are oriented backward so that you can read them using the mirror on your suit’s wrist. Two hard clips on the front of the suit allow you to attach a metal frame that holds all your tools. During a spacewalk you keep yourself connected to the Space Station with at least one tether, clipped to the suit using locking metal hooks.
Spacesuits are white to reflect the heat from the Sun. The suit itself consists of 14 layers of material, with each layer playing a different role in keeping you alive. The most fragile part of the whole suit is the palm and fingers of the gloves: they’re just a few layers thick to enhance dexterity. Since the gloves are so delicate, astronauts pause to check them for damage regularly during spacewalks. In order to have as much tactility in the hands as possible, there is a curved metal bar in the palm of the gloves that can be cinched tight with a strap across the back of the hand, to stop the pressurized glove from bunching up in the palm.
Unlike for the Apollo moonwalkers, the boots on the ISS spacesuit are designed to lock into a portable foot restraint, known as a PFR. PFRs can be located at various places around the outside of the ISS; once you’re locked in, both your hands are free to do work. Without it, you’d always have one hand busy just hanging on.
Before you do a spacewalk there are years of training on suit systems, in virtual reality simulators, in vacuum chambers, and simulating weightlessness under water. Chris spent over 400 hours suited in the pool prior to his first spacewalk. In addition, you need to qualify on SAFER, the Simplified Aid for EVA Rescue. It is a jetpack, used as an emergency self-rescue system in the event that you were to detach from the ISS and go tumbling into space. SAFER is operated by a deployable joystick that fires puffs of nitrogen gas through 24 small nozzles to stop you from tumbling, and to help steer you back to grab onto the Station.
Suits have to be checked for contaminants when they get back to the Space Station to make sure that nothing foreign comes on board that will be a hazard to the health of the crew. The Apollo astronauts had to check for little pieces of unweathered, glass-like Moon dust, and current astronauts check for ammonia from the cooling system of the ISS. Future suits designers will need to think about contaminant considerations: maybe the suits don’t need to come all the way back into planetary bases and can instead just attach to the outer wall of the astronaut habitat.

# Spacewalking: Spacewalks
Spacewalking is dangerous and only performed when a job requires the skill and dexterity of a human—something that can’t be done by a robot. The process of doing a spacewalk is not just physically challenging due to the pressurized resistance of the suit, it is also mentally demanding. You have to focus on your work and your safety as well as using a vast number of potential tools and interacting with the crew on board and the Mission Control team. All the while, the clock is ticking and the universe is ready to kill you.
During a spacewalk you are supported by the crew inside the Station, who help to remind you where you are in the procedures or settings for the tools you are using. You have to work through your tasks with only an emergency checklist, as there is no practical way to carry a printed set of instructions. You are reliant on your crew and a spacewalk-experienced astronaut down on the ground to support you through the procedures. If you are the lead spacewalker, you are also responsible for keeping track of what the other astronaut is doing outside, as well as the cadence, safety, and completion of the entire EVA.
The experience of spacewalking is wildly different from being inside the spaceship. It’s akin to standing next to the window of a high-rise building versus being just a few feet over, but now outside that same window. For Chris, one of the most incredible spacewalk experiences was to walk through the Southern Lights while on the Canadarm2, something he likens to “surfing on the aurora.”
Spacewalking is also a huge honor for you, your family, your agency, and your country—for Chris, his initial EVA was extra special as he was the first Canadian to ever walk in space, an event celebrated on the back of Canada’s five-dollar bill.
