# Getting to Mars
If you look at the 300,000 year history of human exploration, it is evident that the need to explore is fundamental to our nature. Thus sending humans to Mars isn’t really a question of if. It’s merely a question of when. Like every exploratory voyage we’ve made in the past, from crossing the Red Sea for the first time to reaching the South Pole, we’ve had to decide: When will our technology be good enough to make it? And when will we agree as a people that the risk is worth taking?
Mars is alluring because it has an atmosphere, water, and geothermal heat—meaning there may be fossils there, or even life itself. Yet so far we’ve agreed that it has been too dangerous for humans to go look. Even our robotic missions have failed 50 percent of the time just trying to get there. It’s similar to our attempts to sail the oceans of the world in the 1400s, pushing our technology and understanding to the limit, with many missions failing in the attempt. But, as technology developed, humans were able to cross the oceans more safely, to great commercial and scientific impact. There are both business and scientific benefits to come from the risks of exploration.
The technical and engineering challenge to get to Mars is daunting. Mars and Earth both orbit the Sun, which means the distance between the two planets is constantly changing. If we wait for the optimal alignment and use the best engines we’ve devised, it’s still about five months to get there. That’s a long voyage into the unknown with an unproven spacecraft, hauling everything you need, with no way to resupply critical items. And that’s just the beginning. On arrival you have to somehow slow to orbital speed, descend through Mars’s very different atmosphere, and safely land. Not to mention doing it all in reverse to come home to Earth.
The path we take between planets needs to be decided. While the Hohmann transfer is the most energy-efficient way of moving between orbits, it is not optimized for speed. Every day we spend in transit is one more day spent eating food, drinking water, breathing the ship’s air, and producing waste, as well as being exposed to interplanetary radiation and the risk of critical systems failures. If we have enough fuel, we could steer a more direct route, brute-forcing the orbital mechanics. If we invent more efficient engines, we could fire them longer and coast less, also decreasing total time. We may continue to decide that it is infeasible to go to Mars with the engines we’ve invented so far.
On arrival at Mars, we need to slow down to orbital speed. We could fire the engines, but that means we need to haul that braking fuel as cargo all the way from Earth. We could use Mars’s thin atmosphere to provide braking friction, steering to dip exactly into it to gradually slow to the right speed. But the whole transit ship would need to be tough enough to take the associated heat and pressure. A compromise option might be to jettison the habitat that carried us to Mars, get into a capsule, and ride it directly to the surface.
But the Martian atmosphere is much thinner than Earth’s, meaning parachutes won’t work nearly as well. Yet it is thick enough that friction causes heating, so the ship needs appropriate thermal shielding. In 2018 NASA’s Curiosity Rover, which weighs around one ton (on Earth), landed on Mars. A crewed ship would weigh much more. For putting people on Mars, we’ll likely need to use the Martian atmosphere to partially slow down the craft, then fire engines to slow the rate to the surface.
It all sounds very daunting, with a high probability of failure leading to death. But most exploration looked that way at the outset. It is through incremental improvement of technology and choosing the right moment to take a new risk that explorers have succeeded in the past.
# Living on Mars
Growing food in space is a complex proposition; however, solving this problem would provide a sustainable food source and help support the living environment on a spaceship, as plants convert carbon dioxide to oxygen. Experiments are being run on the ISS to explore what types of food can be grown in weightlessness, and eventually on the Moon or Mars. It is likely that a human mission to Mars will have a garden on board and an astronaut trained in horticulture.
Extended weightlessness takes a toll on the human body. We’ve learned from the ISS that there are significant impacts on balance, blood pressure regulation, bone density, and sometimes vision.
For astronauts that travel to Mars, there won’t be a ground support team to assist after landing. Depending how long crews need to adapt under Martian gravity (38 percent of Earth’s), the landing ship may need to function as a rehab facility. The weight and configuration of the Martian spacesuits will also have to allow for this adaptation period. In addition, the natural environment on the surface of Mars is deadly for human life; very low air pressure, no oxygen, 96 percent carbon dioxide, and high radiation. The habitat and spacesuits will need to protect the crews from this.
Life on Mars will also be psychologically challenging. Even when Earth and Mars are at their closest, 35 million miles apart, it takes radio waves about four minutes to get from here to there. So if the Martian crew transmits “Houston, Hawking Base here,” the quickest they will hear a response is eight minutes later—worst case is 48 minutes later. Real-time communication will thus be impossible, and the Martian crew will need to be self-reliant, technically and mentally.
Currently there are simulations looking at possible ways to deal with the communication delay. These include a habitat under the ocean that Chris commanded for two weeks, conducting operations with a Martian-representative time delay. One solution that worked well there used recorded video messages sent back and forth, like has often been portrayed in the movies.
